


\chapter{Numerical Results}
  \label{ch_results}

The primary motivation for Tuna's development is the fact that Pc4s and Pgs
exhibit a variety of heretofore-unconnected properties, and that existing
models are limited in their ability to investigate them. The present chapter
discusses the core results Tuna has so far produced. Particular attention is
paid to the importance of azimuthal modenumber --- a characteristic which is
particularly difficult to study using three-dimensional models, and which is
of importance to poloidal-toroidal coupling, compressional propagation, and
giant pulsations. 

% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
\section{Modenumber and Compression}
  \label{sec_compression}

It's well known that the poloidal FLR mode is compressional at low modenumber,
but guided at high modenumber. However, the relationship is not well
quantified. Theoretical work has historically been concerned with the limits
${\azm \rightarrow 0}$ and
${\azm \rightarrow \infty}$\cite{cummings_1969,radoski_1974}, and only a
handful of satellite observations have explicitly considered an event's
azimuthal modenumber\cite{dai_2013,motoba_2015,takahashi_2013}. Using results
from Tuna, the present section examines the strength of the poloidal wave's
compressional component at an ensemble of finite modenumbers. 

\cref{fig_snapshot_smallm,fig_snapshot_bigm} show magnetic field snapshots
taken from a pair of runs; the first uses a small azimuthal modenumber, and the
 second uses a large one. The runs are otherwise identical: both simulations
use the quiet dayside ionospheric profile, and both are driven at
\SI{22}{\mHz}. 

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/snapshot_smallm.pdf}
  \caption[Magnetic Field Snapshots from a Small-\azm Run]{
    Each row in the above figure is a snapshot in time. The three columns show
    the simulated poloidal, toroidal, and compressional magnetic fields. Due to
    the run's low azimuthal modenumber, the poloidal mode has a significant
    compressional component. This is visible both in the fact that $B_z$ is
    comparable in size to $B_x$, and in that structure in $B_x$ is only vaguely
    guided by the geometry of the magnetic field. Toroidal waves, in contrast,
    are sharply guided. 
  }
  \label{fig_snapshot_smallm}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/snapshot_bigm.pdf}
  \caption[Magnetic Field Snapshots from a Large-\azm Run]{
    The above figure is analogous to \cref{fig_snapshot_smallm}, but the run
    uses a large azimuthal modenumber. The change has a dramatic effect. The
    poloidal wave is concentrated much more sharply in $L$, and its
    compressional component is weakener by an order of magnitude. Regardless of
    modenumber, toroidal waves exist at a range of $L$ shells similar to
    poloidal waves, and show sharp definition across $L$-shells. 
  }
  \label{fig_snapshot_bigm}
\end{figure}

The differences between the two runs are striking. At low modenumber, wave
activity is visible throughout the simulation domain. Structure in the poloidal
magnetic field is only vaguely governed by the dipole geometry, and the
compressional magnetic field is comparably strong to the two perpendicular
components. 

In contrast, at high modenumber, the poloidal magnetic field is localized to
$L \sim 5$, where the driving is delivered. The compressional field is weaker
than the poloidal field by at least an order of magnitude. A third-harmonic
poloidal mode is visible at the outer boundary --- its magnitude is just barely
large enough to be visible on the logarithmic scale. The gap between $L\sim5$
(where \SI{22}{\mHz} matches a first-harmonic FLR) and $L\sim10$ (where
\SI{22}{\mHz} matches a third-harmonic FLR) speaks to the evanescence of
non-guided waves above the compressional \Alfven cutoff frequency\footnote{See
\cref{sec_implications}. }. 

In both the low-\azm and high-\azm runs, toroidal activity is more or less
coincident with poloidal activity --- as is to be expected, since the driving
is purely poloidal, and so the poloidal mode must be the source of the toroidal
mode. It is further notable that the toroidal mode is sharply guided.
Particularly in \cref{fig_snapshot_bigm}, strong, narrow, toroidal FLRs of
opposite phase can be seen oscillating very close to one another. Strong
poloidal waves, in contrast, are smeared in $L$. 

Snapshots are not shown for runs carried out using the other ionospheric
profiles (active day, quiet night, and active night). The morphology of their
waves is qualitatively similar. The differences between the profiles is
considered in \cref{sec_day,sec_night,sec_ground}. 

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/comp.pdf}
  \caption[Compressional Coupling to the Poloidal Mode]{
    Each subplot above corresponds to a different run; the runs shown in
    \cref{fig_snapshot_smallm,fig_snapshot_bigm} are in the rightmost column,
    second from the top and second from the bottom respectively. Red lines
    indicate the ratio between the RMS compressional and poloidal magnetic
    fields. Mean values are shown in black. The compressional field is
    comparable to the poloidal field at $\azm = 1$, but falls quickly. 
  }
  \label{fig_comp}
\end{figure}

\cref{fig_comp} quantifies the compressional component of the poloidal mode as
a function of modenumber. Each subplot corresponds to a different run of Tuna;
the runs shown in \cref{fig_snapshot_smallm,fig_snapshot_bigm} are in the
rightmost column, second from the top and second from the bottom respectively.
The red line indicates the ratio between the RMS compressional magnetic field
and the RMS poloidal magnetic field; both averages are taken over the entire
simulation ``volume'' each time step. Mean values are shown in black. 

At $\azm = 1$, the compressional and poloidal magnetic fields are comparable in
magnitude. As \azm increases, however, the compressional component quickly
falls off. The compressional component is half the strength of the poloidal
component at $\azm \sim 5$, and a quarter by $\azm \sim 10$. Similar behavior
is seen using the active dayside and active nightside profiles (not shown). On
the quiet nightside (not shown), the compressional component of the poloidal
mode does not fall off quite as sharply; $\left| \frac{B_z}{B_x} \right|$ falls
to \SI{50}{\percent} at $\azm \sim 8$ and to \SI{25}{\percent} at
$\azm \sim 16$. 

A slight frequency dependence is apparent across each row in \cref{fig_comp}.
Compressional coupling falls off slower for waves at higher frequency. This
is because higher-frequency waves are that much closer to the cutoff frequency,
and so their propagation across $L$-shells is that much less evanescent. 

Notably, the waves considered in the present work are fundamental harmonics.
The compressional behavior of the poloidal mode may vary for the (more-common)
second harmonic: Radoski suggests that the asymptotic value of
$\left| \frac{B_z}{B_x} \right|$ is inversely proportional to the harmonic
number\cite{radoski_1974}. 

%\todo{Results might vary significantly for even modes. Radoski's 1974 paper suggests that $\left|\frac{B_z}{B_x}\right|\sim\frac{1}{n}$ (where $n$ is the harmonic number). }

%\todo{The nature of the relationship between \azm and the compressional coupling is not obvious. It's not linear, logarithmic, or a power law. }

%\todo{These results line up nicely with Dai's 2015 survey of poloidal Pc4 events\cite{dai_2015}. Events are characterized as compressional or non-compressional based on the ratio $\left|\frac{B_z}{B_x}\right|$. The threshold is arbitrarily set to \num{0.2} --- with no suggestion of a corresponding value of \azm. The results in \cref{fig_comp_2} suggest that Dai's threshold (conveniently!) aligns closely with the paper's definition of ``small \azm'' to mean $\azm < 10$. }

%\todo{Check if a relationship is given in Hughes\cite{hughes_1994}. That's what Lei cites for ``low-\azm waves are compressional.'' Other papers give no indication that this has been looked at before\cite{cummings_1969,radoski_1974}. }

% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
\section{Resonance and Rotation on the Dayside}
  \label{sec_day}

In his 1974 paper, Radoski argues that a poloidally-polarized wave should
asymptotically rotate to the toroidal polarization\cite{radoski_1974} as a
result of the curved derivative in the meridional plane. The question of finite
poloidal lifetimes is considered further in a 1995 paper by Mann and
Wright\cite{mann_1995}, using a straightened field line and an \Alfven speed
gradient in the ``radial'' direction. They also found a rotation over time from
poloidal to toroidal polarization, with the characteristic time proportional to
the azimuthal modenumber. 

The present section builds on the aforementioned results by relaxing several of
their nonphysical assumptions. Tuna's geometry is more realistic than Radoski's
half-cylinder or the box model usede by Mann and Wright. Previous work has
considered the evolution of an initial condition, while the simulations shown
below include driving delivered over time. In addition, Tuna features a finite,
height-resolved ionospheric conductivity profile, rather than the
perfectly-reflecting boundaries used in the past. 

Each subplot in \cref{fig_U_day} is analogous to Figure 3 in Mann and Wright's
paper\cite{mann_1995}. Blue lines show the total energy in the poloidal mode as
a function of time. Red lines show toroidal energy. Runs are organized
analogous to those in \cref{fig_comp}: drive frequency is constant down each
column, and azimuthal modenumer is constant across each row. Axis bounds are
held constant across all subplots. The poloidal and toroidal energy are
computed by integrating over the electromagnetic energy density, per Poynting's
theorem:
\begin{align}
  \label{def_energy}
  U_P &= \displaystyle\int \frac{dV}{2 \mz} \lr{ B_x^2 + \frac{1}{\va^2} E_y^2} &
  U_T &= \displaystyle\int \frac{dV}{2 \mz} \lr{ B_y^2 + \frac{1}{\va^2} E_x^2} 
\end{align}

Where the differential volume $dV$ is computed using the Jacobian\footnote{See
\cref{sec_coords}. } to account for Tuna's unusual geometry. The integral is
evaluated in \lysakx and \lysakz but not \lysaky (Tuna's missing
half-dimension), which gives energy in units of gigajoule per radian. More than
anything else, this serves as a reminder that Pc4 pulsations are localized in
MLT. 

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/U_day.pdf}
  \caption[Dayside Poloidal and Toroidal Energy]{
    Each subplot above shows the poloidal (blue) and toroidal (red) energy for
    a simulation as a function of time. Each row contains four simulations,
    each with the same azimuthal modenumber; the seven rows in each column
    share a drive frequency. Driving is purely poloidal, but energy rotates
    asymptotically to the toroidal mode, and rotation is slowest at high
    modenumber. 
  }
  \label{fig_U_day}
\end{figure}

The 28 runs shown in \cref{fig_U_day} use an ionospheric profile corresponding
to the dayside during times of low solar activity, where the conductivity is
relatively high. The active and quiet dayside profiles are briefly contrasted
in \cref{sec_ground}; for the most part, the focus of the present work is on
the difference between the dayside and the nightside (\cref{sec_night}).
Differences between the two dayside profiles are small in comparison. 

The fact that red (toroidal) lines appear at all in \cref{fig_U_day} speaks to
a net rotation of energy from the poloidal mode to the toroidal. As discussed
in \cref{sec_driving}, Tuna's driving is delivered purely into the poloidal
electric field, reflecting a perturbation in the magnitude of the ring current.

As expected, the rotation from poloidal to toroidal is slowest at large
azimuthal modenumbers. The toroidal energy overtakes the poloidal energy within
a single drive period at small \azm; at $\azm=64$, the most of the energy is in
the poloidal mode for \about10 periods. However, the relationship between
azimuthal modenumber and rotation timescale is not linear, as was suggested by
Mann and Wright. Instead, in a practical setting, the rotation is fastest at
$\azm \sim 4$. 

This is explained by the compressional character of the poloidal mode. At very
low modenumber, energy in the poloidal mode moves readily across $L$-shells. A
significant fraction of that energy is lost to the outer boundary before
rotating to the toroidal mode. At high modenumber, compressional propagation is
evanescent, so all energy in the poloidal mode must ultimately rotate to the
toroidal mode or be lost to Joule dissipation. 

Joule dissipation is a major player in the system's energy economy. However,
due to the highly conductive dayside ionosphere, dissipation timescales are in
the tens of Pc4 wave periods. Energy loss through Joule dissipation
asymptotically balances energy input from driving, but most of that energy is
not lost until after it has rotated from the poloidal mode to the toroidal. As
such, in most runs shown in \cref{fig_U_day}, the energy content of the
toroidal mode asymptotically exceeds that of the poloidal mode. 

The asymptotic energy content of the system also depends on how well the drive
frequency matches the local eigenfrequency. If the two do not match, energy is
lost to destructive interference between the standing wave and the driving. 

In principle, energy moves between the poloidal and toroidal modes due to
their direct coupling through the ionospheric Hall conductivity. In practice,
this effect does not move large amounts of energy. When the runs shown in
\cref{fig_U_day} are repeated with the Hall conductivity set to zero, the
resulting energy curves are not visibly different (not shown). 

The low-\azm runs at \SI{19}{\mHz} merit additional discussion. These runs
accumulate energy over a large number of wave periods, while the low-\azm waves
at \SI{13}{\mHz}, \SI{16}{\mHz}, and \SI{22}{\mHz} do not. This effect is
likely nonphysical. At \SI{19}{\mHz}, a third-harmonic resonance forms very
close to the outer boundary, and is likely enhanced by nonphysical reflections
against the simulation boundary. 

The presence of individual harmonics can be seen in the contours shown in
\cref{fig_layers_day_p,fig_layers_day_t}. These figures show the same runs as
\cref{fig_U_day}, arranged in the same way on the page. However, instead of
showing the total energy integrated over the simulation domain, the energy
densities are averaged over the volume of each flux tube individually.
\cref{fig_layers_day_p} shows contours of poloidal energy density and
\cref{fig_layers_day_t} shows toroidal energy density. 

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/layers_day_p.pdf}
  \caption[Dayside Poloidal Energy Distribution]{
    At low modenumber (top rows), the compressional nature of the poloidal mode
    allows energy to escape the simulation. At high modenumber (lower rows),
    the poloidal mode is guided; energy is trapped at the $L$-shell where it's
    injected, and rotation to the toroidal mode is slow --- ideal conditions
    for resonance. But energy buildup is lackluster except where the drive
    frequency matches the local eigenfrequency (best in the rightmost row). 
  }
  \label{fig_layers_day_p}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/layers_day_t.pdf}
  \caption[Dayside Toroidal Energy Distribution]{
    Whereas the poloidal mode is smeared in $L$ due to its compressional
    nature, the toroidal mode is focused at $L$ shells where it's resonant. In
    general, when the conductivity is high, the toroidal mode also exhibits a
    higher asymptotic energy density than the poloidal mode
    (\cref{{fig_layers_day_p}}). 
  }
  \label{fig_layers_day_t}
\end{figure}

The top few rows of \cref{fig_layers_day_p} confirm that the poloidal mode's
compressional nature is to blame for its failure to accumulate energy at low
modenumber. Waves move so readily across field lines that no visible amount of
energy builds up at $L \sim 5$, the location of the driving. Some energy moves
inward, and is trapped by the peak in \Alfven speed just inside the
plasmapause, while the rest moves to the outer boundary. The time spent moving
across field lines counts against the poloidal mode's finite lifetime,
inhibiting the buildup of poloidal energy density even at $L$-shells where the
wave matches the local eigenfrequency. 

As \azm increases, the energy distribution becomes more concentrated in $L$,
though individual features remain fairly broad. At $\azm = 8$, runs at
\SI{13}{\mHz} and \SI{16}{\mHz} are inclined to build up energy just inside the
plasmapause, while those at \SI{19}{\mHz} and \SI{22}{\mHz} resonate just
outside the plasmapause; in all four cases, the energy is spread over a range
of at least 1 in $L$. 

The peak energy density in the bottom-right run (\SI{22}{\mHz} driving, 
$\azm = 64$) is by far the largest of any run in \cref{fig_layers_day_p}. The
azimuthal modenumber is large, so the poloidal mode is purely guided; energy is
not smeared across multiple $L$-shells. And, crucially, the frequency of the
driving  matches closely with the \Alfven frequency at $L \sim 5$. Other runs
on the bottom row are also guided, but they reach lower asymptotic energy
densities because of a mismatch between the drive frequency and the local
eigenfrequency --- resulting in destructive interference between the standing
wave and its driver. 

Giant pulsations are typically seen at \about\SI{10}{\mHz}, well below the
\SI{22}{\mHz} poloidal peak shown in \cref{fig_layers_day_p}. Part of the
discrepancy is likely due to the position of the driving. Pgs are most common
at latitudes of \about\SI{66}{\degree}, which maps out to $L \sim 6$, whereas
these runs are driven at $L \sim 5$. The size of the plasmapause also has a
significant effect. When the runs in \cref{fig_layers_day_p} are repeated with
the plasmapause at $L = 5$ instead of $L = 4$, the strongest resonance (driven
at $L \sim 5$) drops from \SI{22}{\mHz} to \SI{16}{\mHz} (not shown). 

Whereas the poloidal contours are smeared over a swath of $L$-shells (though
the high-\azm runs less so), the toroidal contours in \cref{fig_layers_day_t}
appear only where the wave frequency matches the local eigenfrequency. A
horizontal line drawn through the \Alfven speed frequency profiles (recall
\cref{fig_fa}) intersects the profile up to three times: once as the \Alfven
frequency drops through the Pc4 range from its low-latitude peak, again as the
\Alfven frequency rises sharply at the plasmapause, and a third time as the
\Alfven frequency drops asymptotically. Toroidal waves can be seen resonating
at all three of these locations in the $\azm = 4$, \SI{22}{\mHz} run in
\cref{fig_layers_day_t}, along with a third harmonic at large $L$. This is
consistent with observations: toroidal resonances are noted for having
frequencies which depend strongly on $L$, in contrast to the poloidal mode's
less-strict relationship between frequency and location. 

In only one of the runs shown in \cref{fig_layers_day_p} does the poloidal mode
attain an energy density on the order of \SI{e-1}{\nJ/\meter\cubed}. On the
other hand, the toroidal mode reaches \about\SI{e-1}{\nJ/\meter\cubed} in six
of the runs in \cref{fig_layers_day_t}. That is, the poloidal mode only
exhibits a high energy density on the dayside only when conditions are ideal;
the toroidal mode isn't nearly so particular. 

% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
\section{Resonance and Rotation on the Nightside}
  \label{sec_night}

Compared to the dayside ionosphere employed in \cref{sec_day}, conductivity on
the nightside is much lower. Runs in the present section use Tuna's ionospheric
profile corresponding to the nightside during quiet solar conditions. The two
nightside profiles are briefly compared in \cref{sec_ground}, but for the most
part the present work is concerned with the behavior of the nightside compared
to that on the dayside. 

Other than the change in ionospheric profile,
\cref{fig_U_night,fig_layers_night_p,fig_layers_night_t} are analogous to
\cref{fig_U_day,fig_layers_day_p,fig_layers_day_t}. Each subplot corresponds to
a different \SI{300}{\s} run of Tuna. Drive frequency is constant down each
column, and azimuthal modenumber is constant across each row. 

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/U_night.pdf}
  \caption[Nightside Poloidal and Toroidal Energy]{
    The energy content of each FLR on the nightside resembles that of a damped,
    driven oscillator. Energy is periodically added to the system, but most is
    lost too fast to rotate to the toroidal mode, particularly at high
    modenumber. There is no significant buildup of energy over multiple
    periods. Runs at $\azm = 1$ (top row) are an apparent exception, likely due
    to a nonphysical interaction with the boundary. 
  }
  \label{fig_U_night}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/layers_night_p.pdf}
  \caption[Nightside Poloidal Energy Distribution]{
    As on the dayside (\cref{fig_layers_day_p}), low-modenumber poloidal waves
    (top rows) readily propagate across $L$-shells and escape the simulation
    domain. Energy density builds up most effectively at high modenumber, where
    the poloidal mode is guided, and poloidal-to-toroidal rotation is slow.
    Even in this case, however, dissipation is fast enough to prevent energy
    from accumulating over multiple drive periods. 
  }
  \label{fig_layers_night_p}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/layers_night_t.pdf}
  \caption[Nightside Toroidal Energy Distribution]{
    On the dayside (\cref{fig_layers_day_t}), most energy rotates
    asymptotically to the toroidal mode. On the night side, the same is not
    true, since the poloidal mode quickly loses energy to Joule dissipation. At
    high modenumber, where the poloidal-to-toroidal rotation timescale is in
    the tens of wave periods, almost all of the energy is dissipated from the
    poloidal mode rather than rotating to the toroidal mode. 
  }
  \label{fig_layers_night_t}
\end{figure}

The low conductivity on the nightside gives rise to strong Joule dissipation.
Waves are damped out in just a few bounces, so asymptotic energy values are
reached quickly. No combination of frequency and modenumber gives rise to the
accumulation of energy over multiple drive periods. 

As on the dayside, rotation of energy from the poloidal to toroidal mode is
fastest at $\azm \sim 4$. Unlike the dayside, however, dissipation on the
nightside is fast compared to the rotation of energy to the toroidal mode.
Toroidal energy does not asymptotically exceed the poloidal energy by a
significant margin in any run shown in \cref{fig_U_night}. At $\azm = 64$,
where the rotation timescale is slowest, no more than \SI{10}{\percent} of the
energy in the poloidal mode rotates to the toroidal mode before being lost. 

Also similar to the dayside, low-\azm runs driven at \SI{19}{\mHz} and
\SI{22}{\mHz} resonate very close to the outer boundary. As before, the
buildup of energy is likely nonphysical. 

Poloidal contours on the nightside (\cref{fig_layers_night_p}) are weaker than
those on the dayside, and build up energy over less time, but otherwise
similar. At low modenumber, poloidal energy propagates across $L$-shells,
preventing the significant accumulation of energy anywhere. As the modenumber
increases, energy is contained near the driving at $L \sim 5$. The strongest
response is seen at \SI{13}{\mHz} on the bottom row, where the modenumber is at
its largest and the frequency matches closest with the local eigenfrequency.
Even in that case, dissipation timescales are comparable to the oscillation
period, so the wave only persists in the presence of continuous driving. 

Toroidal energy contours on the nightside  exhibit significantly different
behavior from those on the dayside. 

At low modenumber, the nightside toroidal mode (\cref{fig_layers_night_t})
contains less energy than on the dayside, but it still shows some preference
for sharp resonances where the drive frequency matches the local \Alfven
frequency. At moderate modenumbers, as on the dayside, the toroidal mode is
more or less comparable in strength to its poloidal counterpart. It's only at
high modenumber that the difference between the dayside and nightside toroidal
contours become truly dramatic. Whereas on the dayside, most energy is
asymptotically deposited in the toroidal mode, on the nightside most poloidal
energy is dissipated faster than the poloidal-to-toroidal rotation timescale.
At $\azm = 64$, where the poloidal mode is at its strongest, the toroidal mode
is at its weakest; it barely registers, even on \cref{fig_layers_night_t}'s log
scale. 

%\todo{The damping on the quiet nightside is so severe that basically nothing resonates anywhere. Should we show the active nightside instead? }

%There is surprisingly little difference between \todo{$\cdots$} (the subplots of which are arranged analogously). Asymptotic energy levels vary --- in the case of high \azm and low frequency, runs in \todo{$\cdots$} are more energetic by an order of magnitude or more --- but the qualitative behavior is the same. Driving is balanced by dissipation over the course of just a few drive periods. Dissipation outstrips poloidal-to-toroidal rotation in the case of large azimuthal modenumber. And, unlike on the dayside, the toroidal mode typically does not match the asymptotic energy level seen in the poloidal mode. 

%As discussed in \todo{$\cdots$}, the nightside's relatively low ionospheric conductivity increases the rate of dissipation. Asymptotic energy content is reached quickly, and is small compared to that seen in analogous dayside runs. 

%The effect is particularly pronounced at large modenumber, where the poloidal-to-toroidal rotation timescale is slower than the nightside dissipation timescale. In most of the dayside runs shown in \todo{$\cdots$}, the toroidal mode asymptotically exceeds the poloidal mode both in terms of total energy content and in terms of peak energy density. On the nightside, the opposite is true. At high modenumber, the asymptotic rotation from the poloidal mode to the toroidal mode doesn't occur until most of the energy has been lost to Joule dissipation. Peak poloidal energy densities at $\azm = 64$ exceed their toroidal counterparts --- shown in \todo{$\cdots$} --- by an order of magnitude. 

%The lower energies in \todo{$\cdots$} (compared to \todo{$\cdots$}, the analogous dayside runs) are not entirely due to increased Joule dissipation. Due to the difference in electric constant between the dayside and nightside magnetospheres\footnote{See \cref{fig_fa}. }, resonant frequencies just outside the typical ($L_{PP} = 4$) plasmapause fall well outside the Pc4 range. None of the frequencies shown in \todo{$\cdots$}, when delivered at $L_{drive} = 5$, align with the local eigenfrequency. 

%\todo{It may be significant that $\int \sigma dz$ is constant across all $L$-shells, but $\int \frac{\sigma}{\va^2} dz$ is not. }

% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
\section{Ground Signatures and Giant Pulsations}
  \label{sec_ground}

While the majority of the action is in space, the majority of FLR observations
have historically been ground-based. The present section explores simulations
(including those discussed in \cref{sec_day,sec_night}) in terms of their
ground signatures rather than their integrated energy distributions. 

\cref{fig_ground_day,fig_ground_night} show fourteen runs each, two per row.
Contours give magnetic fields at the ground, plotted against time on the
horizontal axis and latitude on the vertical axis. Modenumber is held constant
across each row, as in the above sections; columns show north-south and
east-west ground signatures using an ionospheric profile for active (first and
second columns respectively) and quiet (third and fourth columns). 

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/ground_day.pdf}
  \caption[Dayside Ground Magnetic Fields]{
    The magnetic ground signatures are shown for fourteen runs, two per row.
    Azimuthal modenumber is constant across each row. Polarization and
    ionospheric profile vary by column, per the headers. Ground signatures at
    low modenumber are weak because the waves in space are weak, while those at
    high modenumber are attenuated by the atmosphere. Considering both effects,
    ground signatures seem to be maximized at $\azm = 16$ to $\azm = 32$. Peak
    amplitudes above \SI{3}{\nT} are marked.  
  }
  \label{fig_ground_day}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[!htb]
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{figures/ground_night.pdf}
  \caption[Nightside Ground Magnetic Fields]{
    Nightside ground signatures are less strongly peaked than those on the
    dayside, but qualitative features are the same: the strongest signals are
    in $B_\phi$, peaked over just a few degrees in latitude, at a modenumber of
    16 or 32, under quiet ionospheric conditions. 
  }
  \label{fig_ground_night}
\end{figure}

As noted in \cref{ch_flrs}, the magnetic polarization of a low frequency
\Alfven wave is rotated by \about\SI{90}{\degree} as it passes through the
ionosphere. The east-west field on the ground ($B_\phi$) corresponds to the
poloidal polarization in space, and the north-south field on the ground
($B_\theta$) corresponds to the toroidal mode. 

The most striking feature of \cref{fig_ground_day,fig_ground_night} is the
modenumber dependence. As modenumber increases, the magnetic field signatures
become sharply localized in latitude. At high \azm, ground signatures are
concentrated between \SI{60}{\degree} and \SI{70}{\degree}, peaking near
\SI{64}{\degree}, roughly coincident with the foot point of the $L = 5$ field
line; ionospheric ducting is not significant in the Pc4 regime. 

%\todo{Is it weird that we see no ducting from the ionosphere? Does the ionosphere duct ULF waves in the $\theta$ direction, or just in $\phi$? }

At low modenumber, magnetic signatures are weak on the ground because the waves
in space are also weak. At high modenumber, waves in space are strong, but so
is the attenuation of magnetic signatures by the
atmosphere\footnote{See \cref{attenuation}. }. The ``sweet spot'' at which
magnetic ground signatures are maximized falls at $\azm = 16$ to $\azm = 32$. 

Tuna shows stronger ground signatures on the dayside than on the nightside,
more or less in proportion with the difference in magnitude in space. Energy
on the dayside (which depends on field magnitude squared) peaks an order of
magnitude larger than that on the nightside. Peak ground signatures on the
dayside are larger by a factor of four: \SI{45}{\nT} compared to \SI{11}{\nT}.
On both the dayside and the nightside, peak ground signatures are in $B_\phi$,
the east-west magnetic field component; both peaks are also at $\azm = 16$, and
both are seen in runs using the ionospheric profile for quiet solar activity. 

It's further notable that the ground signatures --- particularly those on the
nightside --- exhibit a change in chirality based on latitude. At low latitude,
$B_\theta$ leads $B_\phi$, which creates a counterclockwise signature on the
ground (in the northern hemisphere). At high latitude, the phase is reversed,
resulting in a clockwise ground signature. 

These results match well with the properties associated with Pgs: east-west
polarization, latitude-dependent chirality, peak latitude of
\about\SI{66}{\degree}, and azimuthal modenumber of 16 to 35. Just about the
only properties missing are the azimuthal drift (which is beyond the scope of
the present model) and the distribution in MLT. Pgs are most commonly observed
pre-dawn, but morning and evening ionospheric profiles are not presently
implemented for Tuna. 

% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
\section{Discussion}

The above results show agreement with a number of past FLR studies. In
addition, several novel connections are suggested between known properties of
FLRs. 

The compressibility of poloidal FLRs at low modenumber, but not high
modenumber, is reproduced and quantified. At $\azm \sim 1$, the poloidal and
compressional components of an FLR in the Pc4 range are comparable in
magnitude. At $\azm \gtrsim 6$,
$\left| \frac{B_z}{B_x} \right| \lesssim \frac{1}{2}$, and at
$\azm \gtrsim 12$, $\left| \frac{B_z}{B_x} \right| \lesssim \frac{1}{4}$. 

The present results also suggest that compressional character of poloidal Pc4s
is to blame for the weak relationship between $L$ and frequency, compared to
that seen in toroidal events. Toroidal resonances are defined sharply in $L$
regardless of modenumber, while poloidal resonances are smeared in $L$ ---
particularly at low \azm, but to some degree at high \azm as well. 

The asymptotic rotation of energy from the poloidal mode to the toroidal mode
is reproduced; at small \azm, the rotation timescale is comparable to a wave
period, while at large modenumber it's on the order of 10 periods. On the
dayside, little energy is lost to Joule dissipation on rotation timescales,
suggesting that the poloidal mode is a significant source of energy for
same-harmonic toroidal waves. On the nightside, dissipation timescales are
comparable to wave periods, suggesting that the poloidal mode gives rise to
toroidal waves less effectively. 

Ground signatures at low modenumber are shown to be weak because waves in space
are weak; this is particularly true for poloidal waves --- a non-guided wave
can't very well resonate along a field line --- but also true of toroidal waves
insomuch as poloidal waves are their source. FLRs resonate most strongly at
high \azm, but high-\azm signatures are also attenuated by the atmosphere. The
balance between the two effects falls around \azm of 16 to 32. It's further
suggested that a high-\azm driver will cause a weak resonance in place rather
than tunneling across field lines to a matching eigenfrequency, and that the
same driving should give rise to stronger ground signatures during times of low
solar activity, on both the dayside and the nightside. 

The findings together suggest, awkwardly, that the morphology of giant
pulsations reveals relatively little about their origins. 

One can consider a hypothetical magnetosphere subject to constant driving:
broadband in frequency, broadband in modenumber, just outside the plasmapause.
Low-\azm poloidal waves will quickly rotate to the toroidal mode (and/or
propagate away). High-\azm waves will resonate in place, accumulating energy
over time, and giving rise to ``multiharmonic toroidal
waves''\cite{takahashi_2011}; Fourier components that do not match the local
eigenfrequency will accumulate energy over just a few wave periods before
reaching asymptotic values. Waves with very high modenumbers will
be attenuated by the ionosphere. The response on the ground will be
counterclockwise at low latitude, clockwise at high latitude, peaked at
$16 \lesssim \azm \lesssim 32$, mostly east-west polarized, and notably
stronger during quiet solar conditions. In other words, the measurements will
look very much like a giant pulsation. 

The present results offer no explanation as to the tendency of giant pulsations
to drift azimuthally, or to appear pre-dawn in MLT --- though the latter is
addressed by the observational results in \cref{ch_rbsp}. 

%At low \azm, ground signatures are weak because waves in space are weak because energy can easily escape through the simulation's outer boundary. At large \azm, ground signatures are attenuated by the ionosphere. The ``sweet spot'' in azimuthal modenumber at which ground signatures are strongest is around 16 to 32. Furthermore, ground signatures are strongest when ionospheric profiles corresponding to solar minimum are used. Driving in the poloidal electric field gives rise to primarily ground signatures polarized primarily in the east-west direction at the ground. And, when the frequency of the driving does not match the local eigenfrequency, the high-\azm resonates weakly in place, rather than tunneling across field lines to resonate strongly somewhere else. 

%\todo{Notably, the present work offers no explanation as to Pgs' distinctive distribution in MLT! }

%The results of the present section show agreement with --- and significant refinement of --- past analytical and numerical work. In the case of large (but finite) ionospheric conductivity, dipole geometry, and realistic \Alfven speed profile, energy rotates asymptotically from the poloidal mode to the toroidal mode. The rotation rate is strongly affected by azimuthal modenumber and, in the large-\azm regime, has a characteristic timescale in the tens of periods. 

%The present work furthermore considers the issue of poloidal lifetimes in the low conductivity regime (while past work has used perfectly-reflecting boundaries). Results show that an equally-strong driving current will create weaker FLRs on the nightside. 

%LIFETIMES

%\todo{If \azm is small, energy rotates to the toroidal mode too fast to form a poloidal resonance. If \azm is large, the \Alfven wave is guided, so it resonates only if the driving frequency lines up with the resonant frequency where it's applied. The result is just one big --- or perhaps even giant --- pulsation. If the driving lines up with a nearby field line, the toroidal mode goes crazy! Resonance inside the plasmasphere. Resonance at the plasmapause. Resonance at the driving location. And (weak) attempt at a higher harmonic further out. }

%\todo{When the driving frequency doesn't line up with the location where it's delivered, there's basically no response. There is no movement of energy to a resonant field line, so no energy can accumulate over the course of multiple rounds of driving. Even when not driven resonantly, the toroidal mode still makes the best of its situation. It steals what energy it can from the poloidal mode, carries it to the resonant $L$-shell, and gets to work. (In contrast, recall from \cref{fig_resonant_driving}, in this situation the poloidal mode just does not accumulate energy.) }

%LAYERS

%Low-\azm poloidal modes are not inclined to resonate just outside the plasmapause, even if the driving frequency matches the local eigenfrequency. They slide --- \todo{up?} --- the effective potential surface formed by the sharp \Alfven speed gradient. Some energy accumulates as a third harmonic at large $L$, and some within the plasmapause. 

%GROUND SIGNATURES








